First draft for EKS addon installation guide (#19482)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/containers/guide/operator-eks-addon.md

## Installing Operator

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Console" %}}

* Go to the EKS cluster in the AWS console.
* Go to the add-on tab and select *Get more add-ons*.
* Find and select *Datadog Operator*. Then follow the prompts to complete the installation.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "CLI" %}}

To install the Operator add-on, run:
  ```bash
  aws eks create-addon --addon-name datadog_operator --region <AWS_REGION> --cluster-name <CLUSTER_NAME>
  ```

Add-on installation is asynchronous. To check installation status, run:
  ```bash
  aws eks describe-addon --addon-name datadog_operator --region <AWS_REGION> --cluster-name <CLUSTER_NAME>
  ```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

To verify that the installation was successful, use the AWS Management Console, `eksctl`, or the AWS CLI to confirm that a `datadog-operator` pod is running.

## Configuring Agent

After you have installed the Operator add-on, you can proceed to set up the Datadog Agent.

Follow the instructions to set up the Datadog Agent by using the `DatadogAgent` custom resource.

1. Switch to Operator installation namespace, `datadog-agent` by default.
   ```bash

>    kubens datadog-agent

Reviewer: Can we remove the kubens dependency?

---
title: Installing the Datadog Agent on Amazon EKS with the Datadog Operator add-on
kind: guide
aliases:
 - /agent/guide/operator-eks-addon
further_reading:
  - link: 'agent/kubernetes/log'
    tag: 'Documentation'
    text: 'Datadog and Kubernetes'
---

You can install the Datadog Agent on an Amazon EKS cluster by installing the [Datadog Operator](/containers/datadog_operator)
as an [Amazon EKS add-on](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/eks-add-ons.html) and applying the `DatadogAgent` manifest.

> Agent installed using Operator add-on will collect data only from pods running on EC2 instances, for pods running on AWS Fargate follow the [Amazon EKS on AWS Fargate documentation][10].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Agents installed using the Operator add-on only collect data from pods running on EC2 instances. For pods running on AWS Fargate, follow the [Amazon EKS on AWS Fargate documentation][10].
```

Compared to the regular [Helm installation][4], there are certain differences when installing as an add-on:
* During Operator installation, images must be pulled only from the EKS repository. This can't be changed by the user.
* Operator Helm Chart values, which can be overriden, are restricted to a [schema file][3].

> These restriction are necessary to make Operator compliant with the EKS add-on policies, allow EKS to ensure the safety of the installation, and disable features not yet supported in add-on environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These restriction are necessary to make Operator compliant with the EKS add-on policies, allow EKS to ensure the safety of the installation, and disable features not yet supported in the add-on environment.
```

## Prerequisites

* Subscription to the [Datadog Operator][1] product.

> * Kubectl

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* kubectl installed
```

* If you are using the command line interface for setting up the add-on, [AWS CLI](https://aws.amazon.com/cli/)

## Installing Operator

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Console" %}}

* Go to the EKS cluster in the AWS console.
* Go to the add-on tab and select *Get more add-ons*.
* Find and select *Datadog Operator*. Then follow the prompts to complete the installation.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "CLI" %}}

To install the Operator add-on, run:
  ```bash
  aws eks create-addon --addon-name datadog_operator --region <AWS_REGION> --cluster-name <CLUSTER_NAME>
  ```

Add-on installation is asynchronous. To check installation status, run:
  ```bash
  aws eks describe-addon --addon-name datadog_operator --region <AWS_REGION> --cluster-name <CLUSTER_NAME>
  ```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

To verify that the installation was successful, use the AWS Management Console, `eksctl`, or the AWS CLI to confirm that a `datadog-operator` pod is running.

> ## Configuring Agent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Configuring the Agent
```

After you have installed the Operator add-on, you can proceed to set up the Datadog Agent.

Follow the instructions to set up the Datadog Agent by using the `DatadogAgent` custom resource.

> 1. Switch to Operator installation namespace, `datadog-agent` by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Switch to the Operator installation namespace, which is `datadog-agent` by default.
```

   ```bash
   kubectl config set-context --current --namespace=datadog-agent
   ```
2. Create a Kubernetes secret with your [Datadog API and application keys][5]:
   ```bash
   kubectl create secret generic datadog-secret --from-literal api-key=<DATADOG_API_KEY> --from-literal app-key=<DATADOG_APP_KEY>
   ```
   Replace `<DATADOG_API_KEY>` and `<DATADOG_APP_KEY>` with your [Datadog API and application keys][5].

3. Create a `datadog-agent.yaml` file with the spec of your `DatadogAgent` deployment configuration. The Datadog Operator uses default Agent and Cluster Agent image settings and pulls them from a public registry.

   If you want to pull images from a private EKS registry, you can add `global.registry`. The following configuration enables metrics, logs, and APM:
   ```yaml
   apiVersion: datadoghq.com/v2alpha1
   kind: DatadogAgent
   metadata:
     name: datadog
   spec:
     global:

>        # required in case Agent can not resolve cluster name through IMDS, see the note below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       # Required in case the Agent cannot resolve the cluster name through IMDS. See the note below.
```

       clusterName: <CLUSTER_NAME>
       registry: 709825985650.dkr.ecr.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/datadog
       credentials:
         apiSecret:
           secretName: datadog-secret
           keyName: api-key
         appSecret:
           secretName: datadog-secret
           keyName: app-key
     features:
       apm:
         enabled: true
       logCollection:
         enabled: true
   ```

>    This agent instance configuration pulls the Datadog agent image from an AWS Marketplace hosted ECR repository which also contains the image for the Datadog Operator Amazon EKS add-on. Should you require alternatives, kindly edit the 'global.registry' entry in the manifest above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   This Agent instance configuration pulls the Datadog agent image from an AWS Marketplace hosted ECR repository, which also contains the image for the Datadog Operator Amazon EKS add-on. Should you require alternatives, edit the 'global.registry' entry in the manifest above.
```

   For all configuration options, see the [Operator configuration spec][6].

>    **Note:** If access to IMDS v1 is blocked on the node, Agent will not be able to resolve the cluster name and certain features for example [Orchestrator Explorer][6] will not work. Hence, it is recommended to add `spec.global.ClusterName` in the `DatadogAgent` manifest. See this [comment][8] on how to configure Agent to request metadata using IMDS v2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   **Note:** If access to IMDS v1 is blocked on the node, the Agent cannot resolve the cluster name, and certain features (for example, [Orchestrator Explorer][6]) do not work. Hence, Datadog recommends adding `spec.global.ClusterName` in the `DatadogAgent` manifest. See this [comment][8] on how to configure the Agent to request metadata using IMDS v2.
```

4. Deploy the Datadog Agent:
   ```bash
   kubectl apply -f /path/to/your/datadog-agent.yaml
   ```

> ## Uninstalling Operator

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Uninstall the Operator
```

If you want to uninstall the Agent and Operator, first delete the `DatadogAgent` custom resource:

  ```bash
  kubectl delete datadogagents.datadoghq.com datadog
  ```

Confirm all Agent resources are deleted and proceed with add-on uninstallation:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Console" %}}

* Go to the EKS cluster in the AWS console.

> * Go to the add-on tab and select *Datadog Operator* addon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Go to the add-on tab and select the *Datadog Operator* add-on.
```

> * Click Remove and the confirmation prompt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Click **Remove** and confirm when prompted.
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "CLI" %}}

To delete the add-on, run:
  ```bash
  aws eks delete-addon --addon-name datadog_operator --region <AWS_REGION> --cluster-name <CLUSTER_NAME>
  ```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

>  **Note:** If Operator add-on is uninstalled before deleting the `DatadogAgent` custom resource, agents will continue to run on the cluster. Deleting namespace will get stuck since the `DatadogAgent` can not be finalized without a running Operator. See this Github [issue][9] for a workaround.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 **Note:** If you uninstall the Operator add-on before deleting the `DatadogAgent` custom resource, Agents continue to run on the cluster. Deleting the namespace fails since the `DatadogAgent` cannot be finalized without a running Operator. See this Github [issue][9] for a workaround.
```

{{< partial name="whats-next/whats-next.html" >}}

[1]: https://aws.amazon.com/marketplace/pp/prodview-wedp6r37fkufe
[2]: /getting_started/containers/datadog_operator
[3]: https://github.com/DataDog/helm-charts/blob/operator-eks-addon/charts/operator-eks-addon/aws_mp_configuration.schema.json
[4]: https://github.com/DataDog/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/datadog-operator
[5]: https://app.datadoghq.com/account/settings#api
[6]: https://github.com/DataDog/datadog-operator/blob/main/docs/configuration.v2alpha1.md
[7]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/infrastructure/containers/orchestrator_explorer/?tab=datadogoperator

> [8]: https://github.com/DataDog/datadog-agent/blob/main/pkg/config/config_template.yaml#L407-L416

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit worried that this YAML file may change over time. Consider using a permalink instead (https://github.com/DataDog/datadog-agent/blob/4896a45f586f74de1da2e985f98988f0181afc36/pkg/config/config_template.yaml#L407-L416).

Author: Updated, thanks for the suggestion!

---
title: Installing Agent on AWS EKS using Operator Add-on
kind: guide
aliases:
 - /agent/guide/operator-eks-addon
further_reading:
  - link: 'agent/kubernetes/log'
    tag: 'Documentation'
    text: 'Datadog and Kubernetes'
---

Datadog Operator can be installed on EKS cluster as an add-on. Add-ons provide installation and management of a curated set of add-ons for Amazon EKS clusters. 

## Prerequisites

Installing Operator as an add-on requires following prerequisites:

> * Ability to subscribe to [Datadog Operator][1] product. 

Author: In the end you need a subscription, but subscription is per add-on. So if you are installing add-on for the first time you have to subscribe to it first. But whether you can, depends on what permission I have in IAM. That's why I put ability in the first version, but probably putting subscription implies this anyway?

Add-on isn't published yet. According to EKS team, provided link will work once it's public.

> * Ability to subscribe to [Datadog Operator][1] product. 

Reviewer 3: yup, let's just phrase it as needing the subscription itself, because then that will imply all the permissions.

* [TODO] License manager SLR.

> * Kubectl, AWS CLI if using command line interface.

Author: AWS CLI is required only if it's used to install the add-on. `kubectl` is required whether using console or CLI.

> * Kubectl, AWS CLI if using command line interface.

Author: Updated

## Installing Operator

There are certain differences when using add-on, compared to the regular [Helm installation][4]:
* During Operator installation images must be pulled only from EKS repository, this can't be change by user.
* Operator Helm Chart values which can be overriden is restricted by following [schema file][3].

> These restriction are necessary to make Operator compliant with the add-on policies, allow EKS ensure safety of the installation, and disable features not yet supported in add-on environment.

Reviewer 3: i think this information should be in the top section. we should set the context up-front that there are two ways to install the Operator on EKS—helm chart and add-on—and that this document pertains to the add-on method. we should discuss what reasons a user may have to choose helm vs. add-on.

Author: Thanks for the feedback! Updated in https://github.com/DataDog/documentation/pull/19482/commits/e9180c6ca31e23458b28c5ee9dea2c5542a07d06, basically moved it the section to the top. Let me know what you think.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Console" %}}

* Go to the EKS cluster in the AWS console.
* Go to add-on tab, select *Get more add-ons*.
* Find *Datadog Operator*, select and follow the prompts to complete the installation.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "CLI" %}}

> Run the following command to install Operator add-on:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To install the Operator add-on, run:
```

  ```bash

>   aws eks create-addon --addon-name datadog_operator --region <AWS_REGOIN> --cluster-name <CLUSTER_NAME> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  aws eks create-addon --addon-name datadog_operator --region <AWS_REGION> --cluster-name <CLUSTER_NAME> 
```

  ```

> Add-on installation is asynchrnous, to check the status of add-on run:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Add-on installation is asynchronous. To check installation status, run:
```

  ```bash

>   aws eks describe-addon --addon-name datadog_operator --region <AWS_REGOIN> --cluster-name <CLUSTER_NAME> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  aws eks describe-addon --addon-name datadog_operator --region <AWS_REGION> --cluster-name <CLUSTER_NAME> 
```

  ```

> To delete add-on run:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To delete the add-on, run:
```

  ```bash

>   aws eks delete-addon --addon-name datadog_operator --region <AWS_REGOIN> --cluster-name <CLUSTER_NAME>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  aws eks delete-addon --addon-name datadog_operator --region <AWS_REGION> --cluster-name <CLUSTER_NAME>
```

  ```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> To verify wheather installation was successful, confirm that datadog-operator pod is running either via Console, `eksctl` or AWS CLI.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To verify that the installation was successful, use the AWS Management Console, `eksctl`, or the AWS CLI to confirm that a `datadog-operator` pod is running.
```

## Configuring Agent

> Operator add-on 0.1.x installs Operator only. For Agent setup one can follow steps 2-4 from the Operator [installation guide][2].

Reviewer 3: steps 2-4 are relatively short. i think it's confusing for a user to jump to too many pages. we can just copy/paste those steps here.

Author: Updated in https://github.com/DataDog/documentation/pull/19482/commits/e9180c6ca31e23458b28c5ee9dea2c5542a07d06
